.TH OTOOL 1 "September 19, 1990" "NeXT Computer, Inc."
.SH NAME
otool \- object file printing tool
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B otool
[ option ] ... file ...
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Otool
prints specified parts of object files or libraries.  The file arguments may be
of the form
.I libx.a(foo.o)
which specifies to print information only about that object file and not
the entire library (typically this argument must be quoted,
.I ``libx.a(foo.o)'',
to get it past the shell). 
.I Otool
understands both Mach-O (Mach object) files and 4.3BSD a.out file formats.
It can print the specified information in either its raw (numeric) form
(without the
.B \-v
flag) or in a symbolic form, using macro names of constants, etc. (with the 
.B \-v
or
.B \-V
flag).
.PP
One of the following options must be specified:
.TP
.B \-a
Print the archive header if the file is an archive.
.TP
.B \-S
Print the contents of the `\_\^\_.SYMDEF' file if the file is an archive.
.TP
.B \-h
Print the mach header (for Mach-O files) or the exec header (for 4.3BSD a.out
files).
.TP
.B \-l
Print the load commands (for Mach-O files).
.TP
.B \-L
Print the names of the target shared libraries the object file uses and their
minor version number.
.TP
.BI \-s " segname sectname"
Print the contents of the section
.RI ( segname,sectname ).
If the -v flag is specified the section is printed as is type if that is not
zero.
.TP
.B \-t
Print the contents of the \_\^\_text section (for Mach-O files) or the text
segment (for 4.3BSD a.out files).  With the
.B \-v
flag this disassembles the text.  And with
.B \-V
it also symbolically disassembles the operands.
.TP
.B \-d
Print the contents of the \_\^\_data section (for Mach-O files) or the data
segment (for 4.3BSD a.out files).
.TP
.B \-o
Print the contents of the \_\^\_OBJC segment used by the Objective-C runtime
system.
.TP
.B \-O
Print the strings in the \_\^\_selector_strs and their offset's in that section.
.TP
.B \-r
Print the relocation entries.
.TP
.B \-c
Print the argument strings (argv[] and envp[]) from a core file.

.PP
Some of the following options may also be given:
.TP
.BI "\-p " name
Used with the
.B \-t
and
.B \-v
or
.B \-V
options to start the disassembly from symbol
.I name
and continue to the end of the \_\^\_text section.
.BI "\-T " "hex number"
Used with the
.B \-t
and
.B \-v
or
.B \-V
options to indicate an 4.3BSD a.out OMAGIC file was really loaded at
.I "hex number"
rather than the default.  This is needed because there is no way to tell where
an 4.3BSD a.out file was loaded from the file if it was not loaded at the
default address.
.TP
.B \-v
Print verbosely (symbolically) when possible.
.TP
.B \-V
Print the disassembled operands symbolically (this implys the
.B \-v
option).  This is used with the
.B \-t
option.
.TP
.B \-X
Don't print leading addresses when printing contents of sections.
