.TH STRIP 1 "September 19, 1990" "NeXT Computer, Inc."
.SH NAME
strip \- remove symbols and relocation bits
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B strip
[ option ] name ...
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Strip
removes the symbol
table and relocation bits ordinarily attached to the output
of the assembler and loader.
This is useful to save space after a program has been
debugged.
.PP
The effect of
.I strip
is the same as use of the
.B \-s
option
of
.IR ld (1).
The options
.B \-S,
.B \-x,
and
.B \-X
have the same effect as the
.IR ld (1)
options.
.PP
There are mutually exclusive options to
.IR strip (1)
(except that 
.B \-a or 
.BI \-d " filename"
maybe used with one of
.B \-x,
.B \-S, or
.BR \-X ):
.TP
.BI \-s " filename"
Save the symbol table entries for the global symbols listed in
.I filename.
The symbol names listed in
.I filename
must be one per line with no other white space in the file except the newlines
on the end of each line.
.TP
.BI \-d " filename"
Save the debugging symbol table entries for each source file name listed in
.I filename.
The source file names listed in
.I filename
must be one per line with no other white space in the file except the newlines
on the end of each line.  And they must be just the base name of the source file
without any leading directories.
.TP
.B \-S
`Strip' the output by removing all symbols except locals and globals.  That is
debugging symbols created by the
.B \-g
option to
.IR cc (1)
and other compilers.
.TP
.B  \-X
Save local symbols
except for those whose names begin with `L'.
.TP 
.B  \-x
Do not preserve local
(non-.globl) symbols in the output symbol table; only save
external symbols.
.TP
.B \-A
Save all global absolute symbols except those with a value of zero and that are
not objective-C class symbols.  This is intended for use of programs that use
.IR rld (3)
and only want the loaded code to use symbols from the shared libraries.
.TP
.B \-gg
Only strip the symbol segments produced by the (obsolete)
.B \-gg
option of the compiler
.IR cc (1).
.SH "SEE ALSO"
ld(1), cc(1)
.SH LIMITATIONS
Not every layout of a Mach-O file can be stripped by this program.  But all 
layouts produced by the compiler system can be stripped.
.SH BUGS
The options and how they interplay or don't interplay is a mess.
